---
layout: default 
title: General Information 
parent: Runner Information 
grand_parent: Runners Manual 2021 
nav_order: 4
---

## 2. General Information

The following are some general notes to help runners prepare. However, nothing can prepare you as well as getting out on
the course and becoming familiar with the terrain and run conditions. This manual, as well as the course description,
images of the course, profiles, runner list, and other information are also available on the Hardrock Hundred Home Page.

### 2.1 Other Reading

Apart from carefully reading this manual, other recommended sources of information are listed below. Also, Part 3 of
this manual is some historical information about finishers and course conditions.

1. UltraRunning magazine articles in the years 1992 to 2017.
2. Photos and reports from previous years’ runs on the Hardrock website.
3. Colorado's Fourteeners, 3ed. by Gerry Roach (Fulcrum, 2011). This climbers’ book contains much information on the
   mountains and mountain safety.

### 2.2 The Course

The course is closed. That means that runners are required to follow the specified route. The course starts and finishes
in Silverton. The start and finish will be at the Silverton High School Gym, located at 12th Street and Reese Street
near downtown Silverton. The run will go clockwise this year. There are now scores of ultrarunners who have a good
working knowledge of the course. Many of them are more than willing to lie about the course details and difficulty.

The 2018 course is similar to that of 2017 except run in the opposite direction. The detailed course description and
course log is provided in Part 2 of this manual.

All sections of the course are subject to change because of snow, avalanche damage, rockslides, politics, or other
occurrences. These changes may not be known until the course briefings. It is the runners’ responsibility to understand
and follow any changes.

### 2.3 The Weather

The weather is a dominant factor for this run and can be at least as formidable as the terrain, remoteness, or high
elevation. The run date is a compromise among competing weather factors. There is usually a period of a few days to
weeks each year when the snow is generally gone, but the summer "monsoon" has not yet gotten into full swing – we’ve
tried to hit this window.

The usual "monsoon" pattern is a daily weather cycle, starting in the morning with blue skies. As the day warms up,
thunderheads build up and around noon intense electrical thunderstorms may commence, continuing until late afternoon or
evening, at which time the thunderstorms abate until the next morning.

The Colorado Mountain Club advises climbers in Colorado’s mountains to be off the peaks by noon. Since this may not fit
in with your position on the course, you must use extreme caution. Always remember that the time limit is 48 hours. The
long time limit is not only in recognition of the difficult terrain, but also allows runners to wait out thunderstorms
or other life- threatening weather. You can hunker down in a valley for 2-4 hours and still finish. However, if you get
fried by lightning, your running career may end on the spot. Discretion is the better part of valor.

Take comfort in the fact that these thunderstorms are widespread. If you are pinned down, chances are that other runners
are too. Your position in the field will probably not change. Use the time wisely - eat, drink, stay warm, and rest. You
will be able to run faster when the storm has passed. At the RD’s discretion, Aid Station Captains can hold runners if
weather conditions are considered too dangerous and prevent runners from continuing if not carrying gear appropriate for
conditions.

It is our general opinion that the first fatality we may have will be from lightning! Several runners in past years have
had direct contact with lightning and there have been several more near misses. We would rather that there never be a
fatality or injury. In general, if caught in lightning, head to lower terrain as fast as you can. Before the start we
will continue to give you warnings, cautions, updates, and suggestions regarding the exposure you must face when
attempting this run.

Prepare for any amount of snow! We could even have snowfall just before the run. In 1992 we went back to Handies Peak in
August, just a month after the run, and found six inches of new snow on the ground! In 1997 we had an ice and snowstorm
during the run. Remember, there have been avalanche fatalities in Colorado in every month of the year except September.

### 2.4 Training

You are responsible for being trained well enough to endure these mountains safely. That is why we
impose [entry qualifications](https://www.hardrock100.com/hardrock-qualify.php) on runners. This is definitely a "post
graduate" run, and not just a harder or higher version of some other trail hundred miler. It is up to you to devise a
training program that will get you to Silverton in condition to participate in what can be a very enjoyable experience.
If you can only manage a limited amount of time on the course, we would suggest you pre-run one of the sections with
more "exposure" (sharp drop-offs or snow). This will allow you to calibrate your ability to handle heights against this
year's actual conditions. Charlie Thorn and others will be in the area ahead of time, finalizing and marking the course.
A good way to learn about this year's course is to participate in this process. See the Course Marking Schedule.

### 2.5 Service Requirement

The Hardrock Hundred has a service requirement for all starters. This can be satisfied by performing 8 hours of work in
either 1) organization of an ultra, 2) service at an ultra (e.g. working an aid station), or 3) work on a trail used by
an ultra. Note that generic trail work is not acceptable - it must be a trail on which an ultra is run, and it must be
coordinated with the Race Director of that ultra.

### 2.6 Route Finding

This is not an orienteering event. We intend that you be able to concentrate primarily on running. However, remoteness,
weather, animals, and people problems on the course make this problematic at best. We will mark the entire course before
the run. However, long road sections and maintained trails may not be marked at all. Cross-country sections will be
marked more intensely. We will continue our trend over the past few years of less intense course marking with fewer
flags along all course sections. The flags should be readily visible, even to those with red/green color blindness. The
markers have reflective tags for night visibility. On some portions of the route we may also place colored engineer
tape. Chalk may be used to mark other sections, particularly roads in towns. Runners are responsible for knowing the
prescribed course and following it whether or not markers are present.

**As required by our permit and for environmental reasons, the Hardrock is a closed course run.** It is up to you to
stay on course. If we have lots of snow (a distinct possibility every year), it is difficult to place some markers so
that they remain visible. This is because the run is often at the time of maximum rate of snowmelt, perhaps as much as
6-12 inches per day! If we mark across a snowfield one day, by the next, the markers may have capsized and sunk below
the surface due to softening of the snow.

### 2.7 Runner Tracking

GPS Tracking is required for all runners. This will facilitate our efforts to locate and access you more efficiently in
a Search and Rescue operation, and recognizes the burden such efforts place on our multiple cooperating agencies across
the vastness of the San Juan Mountains. It is by no means imagined to mitigate your risk or personal decision-making.
The actual device will be chosen for its relatively small size, weight and simplicity of use. Your crew and others will
be able to follow your progress through the web-based interface provided by MAProgress. By accepting entry into
Hardrock, you are agreeing to carry the tracking device. We are developing options to assist you with attaching the
device to your running belt, vest, pack and possibly upper arm for optimal GPS reception. Please look for updates to our
ongoing efforts. There is no cost to the runner. You will be issued the tracking device at check-in and will be required
to return it after you have finished or withdrawn from the run. You are encouraged to write Dr. Stephen Halvorson with
questions, comments, suggestions about your gear decisions and other aspects of incorporating the use of a GPS tracking
device.

### 2.8 Fauna and Flora

The elevation range of this run (7,700 to 14,000+ feet) takes the runner through several climate zones. At lower
elevations, forests of aspen, pine, and spruce are common. Timberline is locally at about 11,800 feet, though this can
vary greatly. Above timberline is alpine tundra and low vegetation interspersed with krummholz (low, stunted spruce,
fir, and willow).

In the summer, animal life is abundant. You will almost certainly see elk in the high meadows, possibly with their
young. Stay clear of elk: they can be ornery at times. Bears (black, not grizzlies) are present, though seldom seen.
Mountain lions may also be encountered. The rule with these critters is to back off slowly, stand tall and raise your
arms to appear larger. Try to avoid getting between any animal and its young. If you are attacked, defend yourself - a
sharp whack with a stick might discourage the animal - after all, there is plenty of smaller prey out there.

### 2.9 Dropping Out

While no one likes to contemplate it, there may come a time when it is smarter for you to drop out than to continue.
Also, you may miss the cutoff times or be pulled for a medical reason. While you are likely to be upset at that time,
you must inform the nearest Aid Station Captain because they are the only people authorized to cut off your bracelet.

Depending on your location, it may be very hard for us to arrange transportation from your dropout point to the finish.
You may have to wait many hours, as we may have to coordinate a vehicle via radio. All we can promise is a best try
effort.

### 2.10 Cutoff Times

Cutoff times will be strictly enforced. They are provided in Section 7.2 as well as in the course description, Part 2
and will be posted at each aid station, so there will be no ambiguity. The Aid Station Captain has authority to enforce
the cutoff times. YOU MUST LEAVE THE AID STATION BEFORE THE CUTOFF TIME If you want to go and lie on the ground outside
the designated aid station boundary, it's up to you, but be advised that your chances of reaching (and hence leaving)
any subsequent aid stations before their cutoff times are almost nil. If you "check out" and then come back into the aid
station after the cutoff time, you are considered to have abandoned your attempt at the run. We do not like splitting
hairs so finely, but wish to prevent past problems from recurring. These rules are being made clear to all, so that our
aid station personnel (who also get tired and confused late at night) can concentrate on helping runners and not on
sharpening their debating skills. You are all experienced ultrarunners. We have developed these cutoff times based on
previous years’ results, and they are quite generous. If you miss the cutoff time your chances of finishing are low.
Please try to be mature enough to recognize this. For those aid stations without cutoff times, you are responsible to
get to and depart the next aid station within its cutoff. Do not debate cutoff times with the aid station personnel!
Even if you badger one of them into letting you go on, the Run Director still has the authority to deny listing you as a
finisher. In addition, we may bar from future runs anyone who disobeys rules and threatens their safety or the safety of
the Hardrock personnel. We have to convince the search and rescue organizations of four Colorado counties, as well as
the administrators of five different tracts of federal land, that we are doing what is reasonably possible to make this
a controlled event (note, we don’t say "safe" event). If they are concerned that we are not taking reasonable steps, we
may lose our ability to put the run on in future years.

### 2.11 Sacking Out

If sleeping is part of your strategy for completing the run, you are responsible for providing your own equipment. The
sleeping bags and other facilities at the aid stations are brought by the aid personnel for their own and emergency use
only. At many aid stations shelter is limited or non-existent. All available space is required for conducting essential
aid station operations - do not occupy badly needed tent space while taking your siesta.
